TITLE: Integrating Computation in the Teaching of Physics
AUTHOR: Anders Malthe-Sørenssen {copyright|CC BY} at Department of Physics, University of Oslo
AUTHOR: Morten Hjorth-Jensen {copyright|CC BY} at Department of Physics, University of Oslo & Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University
AUTHOR: Hans Petter Langtangen {copyright|CC BY} at Center for Biomedical Computing, Simula Research Laboratory & Department of Informatics, University of Oslo
AUTHOR: Knut Mørken {copyright|CC BY} at Department of Mathematics, University of Oslo
DATE: today


__Abstract.__
Numerical computation is now a fundamental tool of physics, applied in
both research and industry. But computing has not been an integrated
part of either the contents or the form of the traditional physics
education. We have integrated computing in the education from day
one. This allows us to make fundamental changes in how and what we
teach in the basic physics courses. The students can now work with
realistic, applied problems to a large degree early in their
education, and they learn to apply a problem-solving workflow that
closely reflects realistic workflows they will meet in research or
industry. This change in curriculum also allows for a series of new
pedagogical approaches which involves both students and teachers more
actively, and it allows students to participate in real research
projects early in their studies. Here, we present examples of how this
change in curriculum is implemented and realised in courses where
computing is integrated into the course curriculum; we present studies
of the students' learning process, and we present experience from
student participation in research projects as early as their second
semester.

# Cite original
This paper was originally published in "Uniped, no 4, 2015": "https://www.idunn.no/uniped/2015/04/integrasjon_av_beregninger_ifysikkundervisningen" in Norwegian.

=== Keywords ===

learning, science, computing, student-active, teaching practice, interdisciplinary

======= Introduction =======

Nearly all fields have been transformed by an explosive advance of
computational capacity, and the development is even stronger as the
application of computational power is spread cite{Brynjolfson_2011}. A
normal laptop - the one most students own - is as powerful as a
supercomputer from 10 years ago, so that computations once nearly
impossible, are now accessible to everyone. Nowadays, most scientific
or industrial projects aim at having a strong computing
component. This is the case for fields as astronomy, geoscience,
material science and bioscience, and for all aspects of physics.  But
this development is not followed in the teaching of physics. A study
on the tasks assigned to fresh graduate students from NTNU
cite{Stormo_2009} shows that computing makes an important share of the
task, but that the education has not given the students a strong
enough background in numerical computation.

This should make us, who develop education, worry. Our goal is to
educate students for a 40-year long career, but they lack basic
knowledge that is necessary from day one. However, there has been and
there is an ongoing intense research on how to teach physics. This
activity has brought great understanding in what works in the physics
curriculum cite{Deslauriers_2011}, but it has been
directed towards the form of the education, not on its content.

A modern physics education must have a computing perspective. The goal
is not to make the physics students into informatics students, but to
integrate computing in the execution of the subject, so that we
educate skilled computing experts. Today, computing is used as an
integrated part of the execution of the subject, and the goal is that
this integration is reflected in the education, so that students use
computing as naturally as they use today traditional mathematics. In
order to achieve this, computing should be integrated in all fields,
so that students apply computing frequently and throughout the
studies.

The integration of computing will also give numerous pedagogical
merits. Physics, as other scientific fields, faces meaningful
challenges in motivation and dropouts. With the integration of
computing we can introduce realistic and research-oriented problems
early on in the studies aspects that have been asked for by students
cite{Seymour_2000} and we can give the students more robust strategies
for problem-solving, which is closer to what they will encounter in
research and industry. A computing perspective can also simplify the
presentation of the subject and rekindle the interest that in the
first place attracted so many to this field.

In this article we will come up with examples as to how computing can
be integrated in the physics education, what pedagogical gains are
expected to be achieved, and share experiences from the integration of
computing. The first part of the article describes the build-up of
physics education at the University of Oslo. Thereafter it discusses
examples, experiences, and consequences for future development of the
education.


======= The build-up of a physics education =======

The Physics study programme at the University of Oslo is shown in
the table below:

|-------------------------------------------|
| Semester | Course 1 | Course 2 | Course 3 |
|----l---------X-----------X---------X------|
| 3rd | MAT1120: Linear Algebra | optional | FYS1120: Electromagnetism |
| 2nd | MAT1110: Calculus and Linear Algebra | MEK1100:Vector Calculus | FYS-MEK1100: Mechanics |
| 1st | MAT1100: Calculus | MAT-INF1100: Modeling and Computations | INF1100: Introduction to programming with scientific applications |
|-------------------------------------------|

The education has been structured this way since 2003, but in 2007 the
first informatics course was made into a course more relevant to the
scientific courses. The study has a method package constituted of
three courses in the first semester, two courses in the second, and
one course in the third semester. All these method courses have
integrated computations in the curriculum, and they constitute the
substance for further use of computations in other subjects.

======= Programming and Computations in the first semester =======

The first semester is especially well integrated. The course MAT1100
gives the mathematical substance through basic Calculus, it is
followed up by the corresponding numerical methods in MAT-INF1100, and
in INF1100 the students learn to implement these problems in a
concrete programming language. The connection between these courses
can be illustrated with the example in the table below.

|--------------------------|
| Week 1 | Week 2 | Week 3 |
|---X-------X---------X----|
| The derivative is defined in MAT1100 | The numerical derivative is introduced in MAT-INF1100 | The derivative is implemented in Python in INF1100 |
|  $\frac{d f}{d x}=\lim_{\Delta x\rightarrow 0} \left( \frac{f(x+\Delta x)}{\Delta x}  \right)$ | $\frac{d f}{d x}\approx \frac{f(x+\Delta x)}{\Delta x}$ | `def dfdx(f, x, dx=1E-5):  return (f(x+dx)-f(x))/dx` |
|--------------------------|

It is our experience that this method of teaching gives a deeper
understanding for the mathematical concepts, and at the same time it
gives a more applicable knowledge. It does not though make the content
easier, since connecting the same terms across subjects demands a
higher degree of abstraction.

Programming is a basic knowledge and fundamental way of thinking that
supports and expands mathematical ways of thinking, but it requires a
lot of practice in order to be mastered. Our experience is therefore
that programming should be introduced early in the course of
education, and thereafter be practiced continuously. In order to
secure a good integration, a new adapted learning material in
programming and physics has been developed cite{Langtangen_primer,Malthe_mechpy}.

======= Physics, Mathematics and programming in later semesters =======

The goal with the further build-up of the program is to integrate and
repeat the skills earned from the method-courses into the physics
courses. This is a large development process, and for now we have only
completed a good integration in a few courses. There are numerous
courses that contain some elements in computing - simple examples and
simple exercises that can give some training in computing - but this
does not take into use the whole spectrum of possibilities that a
complete integration of computing could give.

======= Examples on the integration of computing in mechanics =======

The course FYS-MEK1100 offered in the second semester at the
University of Oslo covers a basic introduction of Newton\,'s
mechanics. Corresponding courses can be found in nearly all
Universities all around the world, and curriculum, examples, exercises
and reading material have been well developed for a long time. The
course contains the use of Calculus, especially the solution of
differential equations, to solve problems in mechanics - a subject
that is apt to integration of computing. We have developed a course
with complete integration of computing, and through this work we have
gained some experiences with general pedagogical interest:

===== Robust problem solving =====

Mechanics has a long tradition going back to Newton, with
well-developed examples and exercises. The primary component of the
course is the application of Newton's second law, saying that
acceleration of a body is given by the sum of the forces. Through
Calculus students have learned methods for finding the movement of a
body given its acceleration, and in mechanics they learn how to apply
this to physics problems. The challenge in education lies in the fact
that very few realistic problems can be solved without the use of
numerical computation. Traditionally, the subject has been limited by
what can be solved without computations, and this is why a number of
problems have been developed, which are solvable, but miss realism. In
addition, the problems are often only marginally solvable: a small
change in the formulation of the problem makes it impossible to solve
with analytical (not computational) methods that the students have
learned. The analytical solution is often a special case that cannot
be generalised. This can be frustrating for the student, because
she/he must follow a narrow path through a jungle of difficulties that
she/he has no control over. The choice of this path is in addition
often difficult to explain to the student, since it is based on
experience and not on transmissible principles - a definite method is
chosen since it is now known that it brings to the answer, based on a
long experience of trial and error.

Fortunately, there is a simple solution to this problem - by letting
go the requirement of having an analytically solvable problem, and
instead look at problems that can also be solved numerically on
computers. This requires a slightly different presentation of the
curriculum, but it gives a totally robust solution method that the
students can apply, and that always works. The traditional
presentation of the subject follows the problems that could be solved
analytically, and the solution methods for these problems. The new
presentation, where computing is integrated, follows a partition of
the curriculum in separate laws for reciprocity - laws of motion - so
that the problems can be solved independently of whether the resulting
equation are solvable. This gives the students a more robust toolkit
that is generalisable, allowing the students to look at more realistic
problems, covoring the subject in a more realistic manner.

===== Theory presentation from the perspective of realistic data =====

With the integration of computing we can support explanations and
theory from realistic data. For example, we can teach students about
motion by looking at the running of Usain bolt in the Olympic Games in
Beijing. Data on the running is available, with position as a function
of time. We can use this data to introduce the terms velocity and
acceleration, and thus analyse Bolt's acceleration throughout the
running. We bind this analysis with the physics understanding by
developing a realistic model for the run, based on a set of laws of
motion that take into account air resistance, the transition from the
crouching position to fully extended position, and physical
exhaustion. The model can be solved numerically and is compared to
data, and the model can be simplified and solved analytically as
well. This creates a working process that is very similar to the one
physicists use when they face a real life problem setting.  As another
example on the use of data, students learn about the movement of
planets by downloading data from NASA, analysing the data and find
Newton's Law of gravity, and then apply Newton's Law of gravity to
study the movement of planets in a more general setting. By starting
with Newton's Law of motion and computing the orbit of a body
numerically, we will normally find an elliptic or hyperbolic orbit
releasing the gravitational field. It is only for a very special
choice of initial conditions that we will get a circular orbit - which
is the one that can be simply analysed analytically. By starting with
data and applying the computations, students achieve a realistic,
general learning process, instead of starting with an artificial
assumption stating that planets travel in a circular orbit.  The most
important aspects of this approach are: the students experience
physics as a powerful, applicable tools; they learn a realistic
working process that they will have use of in the future; they can
work from early on with realistic problem settings, something that is
both motivating and inspiring.

===== Learning through cooperation and discussion =====

Another classical example from physics is the study of the orbit of a
cannonball without air resistance - a parabolic orbit. The example has
a long tradition and illustrates how often a problem is simplified
down to - and above - its simplest components.  But the same learning
goals can also be achieved by letting the student look at a modified
version of the example: by computing the orbit of a sensor shot
through a tornado (see Figure ref{fig:tornado}). The velocity field
of the tornado is given, but every student must develop a model on
her/his own and model the orbit of the sensor. The most important
element in the learning process is when the students sit next to each
other as they solve the problem. All students will get slightly varied
results, depending upon their choice of elements in the theory, and/or
different starting points for the sensor. When a student compares her
results with the results of her fellow student sitting next to her,
they will have to reason out whether the differences are due to errors
or differences in the models - and in that discussion the student is
made to apply and formulate her arguments. This process of formulation
can be a central element in building the basic concepts for the
understanding of physics cite{Sorby_2009}.

FIGURE: [fig/tornado, width=500 frac=0.8] Illustration of the classical bullet orbit and of the orbit of a sensor shooting through a tornado. The underlying equations are the same, but for a tornado it is only possible to solve the problem with numerical computations. label{fig:tornado}


===== Formulation of algorithms gives understanding =====

In the Mechanics course we often ask the students to write a computer
program to find the solution to a given problem. For well-chosen
problems, this will push the student to formulate her understanding of
physics and adapt that understanding to a tangible set of algorithmic
steps. This process has a lot in common with explaining the solution
to another student - a process which has been shown to be very
important to building a good understanding of physics (Deslauriers et
al. 2011; Mazur, 1996). This will also help the student to better her
understanding of the subject: it is important to note that often
understanding is an illusion, but this illusion can be unraveled when
the student translates her understanding into an algorithm.

An example on this is to ask the student to make a program to find the
movement of a body influenced by friction. The classical Law of
Friction distinguished between static and dynamic friction. Dynamic
friction is simple to implement in a program, while to implement
static friction, and especially the transition from dynamic to static
friction, it is necessary to thoroughly think about the underlying
physical concepts. In such a case, the formulation of an algorithm
will give the students a more general insight into friction than
through basic exercises.


===== Problems close to research and participation in research =====

Integration of computing gives the students practical, operative
knowledge that makes it possible for them to work with problems close
to the world of research, and have a great contribution to research
projects. Through the creation of well directed problem settings, a
good instruction-based guidance and long-term follow-up, students can
take part in research groups as valuable members, as early as in the
Bachelor degree, with the possibility of participating to
publications, as proved in cite{Tromborg_2014}.

======= Experiences and learning outcome =======

Studies on the student's learning outcome in FYS-MEK1100
cite{Sorby_2009} show that students often adopt their own's modelling
mode when they program. This can make the process of connecting
mathematical, physical and programming aspects of the problem setting
into a challenge. Students have a tendency to think about every
problem separately, and don\,'t use for example the physical intuition
to interpret and correct the code. A better presentation of the
assignments, with stronger weight on connections across fields, can
improve this situation. The use of computations seems to both give a
better understanding of the model, and give more possibilities to
explore models outside the box they have been developed for - so that
students also get an experience of discovery and experimentation.

Exam schemes integrating the use of computations can be quite good to
evaluate the students understanding of the subject. This can for
example be done by asking the student to write a program to find the
answer to an exercise. In mechanics it is as simple to check if a
student knows the difference between a scalar and a vector in a
mathematical formulation of the problem or in a program solving the
problem. But a program will also show if the student understands a
wider set of aspects with the model. For example, the model of a rope
will have different behaviour if the rope is stretched out or pressed
together; this difference comes out more clearly when the student
formulates her understanding in a program.

Teachers who have worked with the integration of computing have
experienced that it is important to introduce programming separately
before it is applied to other subjects: experience tells that it is
more than double as difficult to learn two things contemporarily than
learning only the physics in one course. Also, it has become clear
that longer case-studies with computations often contribute to
building a positive learning environment, with good discussions among
students and between student and teacher. It seems to be easier to ask
a teacher about programming and implementation more than about
physics; but all questions lead anyways to good physics debates that
give a good learning payoff for the students cite{Deslauriers_2011,Mazur_1996}.

======= Conclusion =======

There exist highly impressive pedagogical and professional arguments
for the integration of computing in the study of Physics - and truly
in every other study with a mathematical component. Integrating
computations moves the perspective from form to content, and it gives
a necessary modernisation to the content of Physics as a science. This
also gives the students a toolbox which for the applicability of the
subject; it makes it possible to introduce realistic and applied
problem settings; it motivates and inspires the students even when
some effort is necessary; it opens for the possibility of discussions
around physics among students. The greater challenge is today the lack
of good learning material and good examples - a challenge that demands
for a vigorous boost, but that will also be an inspiring journey into
which to travel for every ambitious teacher.

======= References =======

BIBFILE: papers.pub
